Add 1.9 release notes (#514)
kyma-project/website: content/blog-posts/2020-01-09-release-notes-1.9/index.md

---
title: "Kyma 1.9 Paris"
author:
  name: "Malgorzata Swieca, Technical Writer @Kyma"
tags:
  - release-notes
type: release
releaseTag: "1.9.0"
redirectFrom:
  - "/blog/release-notes-19"
---

> Bonjour à tous! Welcome to Paris where we land surrounded by breathtaking architecture and renowned galleries. A little bit intimidated by the cultural capital of Europe, we stopped by to proudly exhibit Kyma 1.9 with its new features. This release we focused on Compass functionalities, monitoring updates, or new request headers and query parameters in the Application Connector. We also did some merging and renaming to create Rafter - a standalone project for managing assets through custom resources - and integrate it in Kyma. Read the full release notes for the complete list of improvements offered by the 1.9 release. Voilà!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bonjour à tous! Welcome to Paris where we land surrounded by breathtaking architecture and renowned galleries. A little bit intimidated by the cultural capital of Europe, we stopped by to proudly exhibit Kyma 1.9 with its new features. This release we focused on Compass functionalities, monitoring updates, and new request headers and query parameters in the Application Connector. We also did some merging and renaming to create Rafter - a standalone project for managing assets through custom resources - and integrate it in Kyma. Read the full release notes for the complete list of improvements offered by the 1.9 release. Voilà!
```

> Bonjour à tous! Welcome to Paris where we land surrounded by breathtaking architecture and renowned galleries. A little bit intimidated by the cultural capital of Europe, we stopped by to proudly exhibit Kyma 1.9 with its new features. This release we focused on Compass functionalities, monitoring updates, or new request headers and query parameters in the Application Connector. We also did some merging and renaming to create Rafter - a standalone project for managing assets through custom resources - and integrate it in Kyma. Read the full release notes for the complete list of improvements offered by the 1.9 release. Voilà!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bonjour à tous! Welcome to Paris where we land surrounded by breathtaking architecture and renowned galleries. Slightly intimidated by the beauty of the cultural capital of Europe, we stopped to proudly exhibit Kyma 1.9 with its new features. This release we focused on Compass functionalities, monitoring updates, and new request headers and query parameters in the Application Connector. We also worked on creating Rafter - a standalone project for managing assets through custom resources - and integrated it in Kyma. Read the full release notes for the complete list of improvements offered by the 1.9 release. À bientôt!
```

Author: I applied all your suggestions except for changing "Voilà!" ;)

<!-- overview -->

See the overview of all changes in this release:

- [Application Connector](#application-connector) - New custom request headers and query parameters for APIs secured with OAuth

> - [Asset Store aka Rafter](#asset-store-aka-rafter) - Asset Store and Headless CMS refactored and merged into Rafter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Rafter](#asset-store-aka-rafter) - Asset Store and Headless CMS refactored and merged to create Rafter
```

> - [CLI](#cli) - Support for Azure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [CLI](#cli) - Support for cluster provisioning on Microsoft Azure
```

Directly on AZ or through Gardener?

Author: directly, I added the following link to make it clearer: https://github.com/kyma-project/cli/blob/master/docs/gen-docs/kyma_provision_azure.md

> - [Compass](#compass) - Provisioner enhanced, Application Templates added, API Director playground prepared to try out, list view in the Compass UI redesigned, and more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Compass](#compass) - Provisioner enhanced, Application Templates added, API Director playground added,  redesigned list view in the Compass UI, and more
```

Author: to avoid the repetition of "added", I changed this part to 
```suggestion
- [Compass](#compass) - Provisioner enhanced, Application Templates and API Director playground added, redesigned list view in the Compass UI, and more
```

- [Console](#console) - Improved Addons Configuration view

> - [Eventing](#eventing) - Knative Eventing mesh available for testing purposes

Reviewer 2: Eventing Mesh/mesh?

Author: Mesh

> - [Installation & Documentation](#installation-&-documentation) - Gardener provisioning based on Kyma CLI documented

Reviewer: The & symbol breaks the link and it's not working. We can change it to "and".

Author: It seems changing the link to `#installation-documentation` should solve the problem and the symbol can stay.

> - [Monitoring](#monitoring) - Adjustments and update to the latest version

Reviewer 2: In context of Kyma we're using "upgrade" to describe moving to a newer version of the software. I'd stick to that here.

- [Service Management](#service-management) - Changes in the deletion process of the ServiceBroker custom resource

> - [Known issues](#known-issues) - Workarounds for issues with backup and Ratfer, and logging components

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Known issues](#known-issues) - Workarounds for issues with backup, Ratfer, and logging components
```

or

```
- [Known issues](#known-issues) - Workarounds for backup issues with Ratfer and problems with logging components

Author: I will choose the second version you proposed, thank you.

- [Migrations and upgrades](#migrations-and-upgrades) - Rafter-related scripts and guidelines for the 1.8.0 - 1.9.0 upgrade

## Application Connector

> Starting from this release, we support additional headers and query parameters in OAuth token calls. Now you can customize the flow in an easy and native way. Check the Application Connector [documentation](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/release-1.9/docs/application-connector/08-04-register-secured-api.md#register-an-oauth-secured-api) to find the tutorial and examples.

Reviewer 2: ```
 an easy and native way. 
```

What does this really mean? Sounds weird

Author: yup, weird it is.. removed

## Asset Store aka Rafter

In the last two months, we focused on refactoring the Asset Store and Headless CMS components. Our goals were to:

- Optimize those components for resources consumption,
- Move those components to a separate repository as they do not depend on Kyma. As a result, we aimed to have an independent project with its own release cycles that is open for the wider community.

During the refactoring, we noticed that after a few months of developing and making changes in the Headless CMS, that had been built on top of the Asset Store, it was generic enough to become a part of the Asset Store. We renamed a DocsTopic custom resource (CR) to an AssetGroup CR which allowed us to have a single controller manager instead of two. The final result was that we merged those two components into one under a new name [Rafter](https://github.com/kyma-project/rafter/).

Due to the fact that we use [MinIO](https://min.io/) as a backend for Rafter, we get an S3-like files/assets store managed with [CRs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/).

> This release introduces Rafter in Kyma. For more details, read the [documentation](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/tree/release-1.9/docs/rafter). To make sure the switch is seamless, we prepared automated migration for your convenience. For more details, see the [Migrations and upgrades](#migrations-and-upgrades) section.

Reviewer 3: I'm not really convinced we should link to the repository. Release notes for a given version are most interesting for a given release. In my opinion, you should still ink to kyma-project.io to a specific version, once we remove it from docs in 3 months our links governance job will figure it out and fixing links will be a 10min job really

Author: We will discuss the approach on the coming Content SIG and I personally think that using links that are going to break is kind of pointless but as there is no official decision yet, I will link to kyma-project.io as content looks better there ;)

## CLI

### Azure support

Finally, you can provision a Kubernetes cluster on Azure basing on AKS. It follows the same command pattern as Google Cloud Platform basing on GKE. Give it a try and run `kyma provision azure`.

## Compass

### Provisioner

> It is now possible to install Kyma on provisioned clusters. After cluster creation is finished, the Provisioner will attempt to install a basic Kyma deployment. At this point, the supported environment for the installation is Gardener with Azure or GCP credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is now possible to install Kyma on provisioned clusters. After cluster creation is finished, the Provisioner attempts to install a basic Kyma deployment. At this point, the supported environment for the installation is Gardener with Azure or GCP credentials.
```

> It is now possible to install Kyma on provisioned clusters. After cluster creation is finished, the Provisioner will attempt to install a basic Kyma deployment. At this point, the supported environment for the installation is Gardener with Azure or GCP credentials.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now install Kyma on clusters provisioned through the Provisioner. After cluster creation is finished, the Provisioner installs a basic Kyma deployment. You can provision clusters in the Gardener environment using Azure or GCP credentials.
```

Also, the `cleanupRuntimeData` mutation does not only return a cryptic operation ID but also provides a status. You get information on whether your request input has errors or if the data was deleted successfully. You only need one call to get detailed knowledge of the clean-up result.

### Runtime eventing configuration available for Applications in the same scenario  

> When you create a scenario and then assign Applications and Runtimes to it, the first registered Runtime is nominated as the default Eventing System. That information is spread over all Applications and can be consumed by External Applications that start to send events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create a scenario and then assign Applications and Runtimes to it, the first registered Runtime is nominated as the default Eventing System. That information is spread over all Applications and can be consumed by external Applications that start to send events.
```

Reviewer: Why do we capitalize Eventing System?

Author: I won't capitalize that, thanks.

However, the Compass scenario Administrator still can decide that another Runtime from a given scenario should play the role of the default Eventing System. Changing the Runtime adjusts Applications automatically.

### Application Templates API

Now you can preconfigure Application input with Application Templates. It allows you to easily create similar Applications by defining placeholders and filling in the static configuration data.

### Play with Director API

> Visit the Director API GraphQL playground and try out the Director API! We have prepared API documentation along with examples that you can access there.

Reviewer 2: Where do I find the playground?

Author: I added the following:
```
Learn how to access the Director GraphQL API [here](https://github.com/kyma-incubator/compass#usage).
```

### Harmonization of list views in the Compass UI

For this release, we redesigned our list component to improve and harmonize UX around list views in the Compass UI.

![List views](./list-views-in-compass-UI.png)

### Other Compass improvements

Kyma 1.9 also introduces improvements to the Compass Director API. Now the mutation and query names are more descriptive, the GraphQL input is properly validated for all mutations, and the Tenant Mapping Handler error handling is much more efficient.

## Console

### Redesigned Addons Configuration  

> We redesigned the Addons Configuration view. Now, with the recent changes, you can see a more detailed status of each addon that you configured via addon repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We redesigned the Addons Configuration view. Now you get a more detailed status of each addon that you configured through addon repositories.
```

![Status information](./status-info.png)

## Eventing

### Knative Eventing mesh (Alpha)

> In this release, we introduced a new Knative Eventing mesh as an alpha feature which you can use for testing purposes only. It leverages Knative Eventing components to build an eventing mesh that provides event routing and pub/sub capabilities. This mesh layer abstracts the underlying messaging system and allows you to configure different persistence for each Namespace. The new Eventing Mesh runs in parallel with the existing Event Bus. The Kyma Event Bus still supports sending Events to the regular eventing endpoint, while a separate Kyma endpoint handles sending Events to the new Knative Eventing Mesh. Read more about it [here](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/release-1.9/docs/event-bus/03-04-knative-eventing-mesh.md).

Reviewer: Eventing mesh vs. Eventing Mesh vs. eventing mesh? We need more consistency here.

Reviewer 4: it was agreed with @bszwarc that we'll use `Knative Eventing` mesh. Since `Knative Eventing` is considered the brand name, and mesh is just a technical term like network, service or pod.

Author: In our documentation ay kyma-project.io the official name is "Knative Eventing Mesh", I updated the section according to the official docs.

## Installation & documentation

### Gardener provisioning based on Kyma CLI documented

> After having the feature of provisioning a Gardener cluster via CLI introduced the last release, we documented it officially now. The instructions for provisioning a Gardener cluster on GCP or Azure is now based on Kyma CLI. Check it out in [this](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/master/docs/kyma/04-04-cluster-installation.md#prepare-the-cluster) document under the **Gardener** tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After introducing Gardener cluster provisioning through the Kyma CLI in the previous release, in this release, we added the official documentation for this feature. The instructions for provisioning a Gardener cluster on GCP or Azure are now based on Kyma CLI. Check it out in [this](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/master/docs/kyma/04-04-cluster-installation.md#prepare-the-cluster) document under the **Gardener** tab.
```

  - memory limit - `4GB`,
  - data retention time - `2d`,
  - data retention size - `7GB`.
  
  Still, these settings can be changed during installation.

## Service Management  

### ApplicationBroker doesn't delete the ServiceBroker custom resource (CR) if the user still has ServiceInstances created using this broker  

If the ServiceBroker CR is deleted before the removal of the corresponding ServiceInstance, the ServiceInstance can not be deprovisioned from the Service Catalog. Since this release, the Application Broker does not remove the ServiceBroker CR if there are any ServiceInstances created using this broker. Only once no related ServiceInstances are remaining, the Application Broker removes the ServiceBroker CR and deactivates the Application.

## Known issues

### Backup & Rafter

Due to some issues with Velero, right after restoring Kyma you need to follow some additional manual steps related to [Rafter](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/release-1.9/docs/rafter/01-01-rafter.md):

1. Remove the cluster-wide default bucket:

   ```bash
   kubectl delete clusterbuckets.rafter.kyma-project.io --selector='rafter.kyma-project.io/access=public
   ```

> 2. Remove buckets from the namespaces where you use them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Remove buckets from the Namespaces where you use them:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl delete buckets.rafter.kyma-project.io --selector='rafter.kyma-project.io/access=public' --namespace=default
   ```

### Logging

> The Promtail Pod gets stuck in the CrashLoopBackoff phase. The reason is that the content of the `positions.yaml` file used by Promtail gets corrupted on the last line. You should see the following error message: `caller=main.go:56 msg="error creating promtail" error="yaml: line 107: could not find expected ':'`. A temporary workaround for the issue is as follows:

Reviewer: Maybe putting the error message in a code block would be a better option?

1. Create a simple Pod which runs on the same Node as the problematic Promtail Pod and mounts the `/run/promtail` folder on hostPath.

> 2. Exec into the Pod and delete the last line of the `/run/promtail/positions.yaml` file.

Reviewer: Exec?

Author: I changed it to: 
```
2. Modify the Pod definition by deleting the last line of the `/run/promtail/positions.yaml` file.
```

3. Delete the crashing Pod.

## Migrations and upgrades

> As mentioned in the [Asset Store aka Rafter](#asset-store-aka-rafter) section, the Asset Store and Headless CMS components are replaced with a new one - Rafter. The most visible change is that DocsTopic and ClusterDocsTopic [CRs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) are removed and replaced with AssetGroup and ClusterAssetGroup [CRs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). When migrating from Kyma 1.8.0 to 1.9.0 we automatically:

Reviewer: Do we need the linking to CRs? We have already included the link in the Rafter section.

> As mentioned in the [Asset Store aka Rafter](#asset-store-aka-rafter) section, the Asset Store and Headless CMS components are replaced with a new one - Rafter. The most visible change is that DocsTopic and ClusterDocsTopic [CRs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) are removed and replaced with AssetGroup and ClusterAssetGroup [CRs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/). When migrating from Kyma 1.8.0 to 1.9.0 we automatically:

Reviewer 2: [Asset Store aka Rafter] -> change here too if you decided to use my suggestion

> - Duplicate all the files from system buckets (used by the Upload Service) in a new MinIO instance to assure the recovery of assets created by the Application Registry,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Duplicate all files from system buckets (used by the Upload Service) in a new MinIO instance to assure the recovery of assets created by the Application Registry,
```

- Duplicate all old resources in the new component, under the new name and API groups,
- Remove the Asset Store and Headless CMS components after successful migration.

To guarantee the necessary data duplication and fulfill the need to run all components during the upgrade, make sure your cluster has enough resources. The migration scripts are available [here](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/tree/release-1.9/resources/rafter/templates).

> >**NOTE:** Old CustomResourceDefinitions (CRDs) are not removed automatically during the upgrade process. Leaving the CRDs does not influence the upgrade. However, you can remove them using this script:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>**NOTE:** Old CustomResourceDefinitions (CRDs) are not removed automatically during the upgrade process. Leaving the CRDs does not influence the upgrade. These CRDs will be removed with 1.10 release. However, you can remove them manually now using this command:
```

Author: I changed it the way you wrote; however, I'm afraid I will have to remove the NOTE and male a section of this part because the command does not display well and breaks the NOTE.

redirectFrom:
  - "/blog/release-notes-19"
---

Bonjour à tous! Welcome to Paris where we land surrounded by breathtaking architecture and renowned galleries. Slightly intimidated by the beauty of the cultural capital of Europe, we stopped to proudly exhibit Kyma 1.9 with its new features. This release we focused on Compass functionalities, monitoring updates, and new request headers and query parameters in the Application Connector. We also worked on creating Rafter - a standalone project for managing assets through custom resources - and integrated it in Kyma. Read the full release notes for the complete list of improvements offered by the 1.9 release. Voilà!

<!-- overview -->

See the overview of all changes in this release:

- [Application Connector](#application-connector) - New custom request headers and query parameters for APIs secured with OAuth
- [CLI](#cli) - Support for cluster provisioning on Microsoft Azure
- [Compass](#compass) - Provisioner enhanced, Application Templates added, redesigned list view in the Compass UI, and more
- [Console](#console) - Improved Addons Configuration view
- [Eventing](#eventing) - Knative Eventing Mesh available for testing purposes

> - [Installation & Documentation](#installation-documentation) - Gardener provisioning based on Kyma CLI documented

Reviewer: The link still doesn't work :(

Author: it works on the website

## Compass

### Provisioner

You can now install Kyma on clusters provisioned through the Provisioner. After cluster creation is finished, the Provisioner installs a basic Kyma deployment. You can provision clusters in the Gardener environment using Azure or GCP credentials.

Also, the `cleanupRuntimeData` mutation does not only return a cryptic operation ID but also provides a status. You get information on whether your request input has errors or if the data was deleted successfully. You only need one call to get detailed knowledge of the clean-up result.

### Runtime eventing configuration available for Applications in the same scenario  

When you create a scenario and then assign Applications and Runtimes to it, the first registered Runtime is nominated as the default eventing system. That information is spread over all Applications and can be consumed by external Applications that start to send events.

> However, the Compass scenario Administrator still can decide that another Runtime from a given scenario should play the role of the default Eventing System. Changing the Runtime adjusts Applications automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the Compass scenario Administrator still can decide that another Runtime from a given scenario should play the role of the default eventing system. Changing the Runtime adjusts Applications automatically.
```

Due to the fact that we use [MinIO](https://min.io/) as a backend for Rafter, we get an S3-like files/assets store managed with [CRs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/).

This release introduces Rafter in Kyma. For more details, read the [documentation](https://kyma-project.io/docs/1.9/components/rafter/). To make sure the switch is seamless, we prepared automated migration for your convenience. For more details, see the [Migrations and upgrades](#migrations-and-upgrades) section.

## Service Management  

### ApplicationBroker doesn't delete the ServiceBroker custom resource (CR) if the user still has ServiceInstances created using this broker  

If the ServiceBroker CR is deleted before the removal of the corresponding ServiceInstance, the ServiceInstance can not be deprovisioned from the Service Catalog. Since this release, the Application Broker does not remove the ServiceBroker CR if there are any ServiceInstances created using this broker. Only once no related ServiceInstances are remaining, the Application Broker removes the ServiceBroker CR and deactivates the Application.

## Known issues

### Backup & Rafter

> Due to some issues with Velero, right after restoring Kyma you need to follow some additional manual steps related to [Rafter](https://kyma-project.io/docs/1.9/components/rafter/):

Reviewer: Do we need to repeat the link here? It was already used in the Rafter section.

Author: removed
